When we have standard index form, to state the order of magnitude we use the $10^n$ part.

If you have the number in the form  $N\times10^n$ and $N\geq 5$, the order of magnitude estimate of the number becomes $10^{(n+1)}$. Otherwise it stays the same.

$1.2\times10^{-10}$, the order of magnitude is $10^{-10}$ which is about the size of an atom.

Diffraction of a wave will occur if the aperture of a hole is comparable to the wavelength of the incident wave.
In 1924 Davidson and Gerner performed an experiment which showed that a stream of electrons in fact exhibit wave properties according to the de Broglie hypothesis. 

When electrons are excited with energy, they move to a higher level shell. When they de-excite and lose that energy they give out a photon of light.

When a low pressure gas in a tube is subjected to voltage, the gas ionises and emits light.
We can analyse incident light by looking at it through a spectroscope.
A spectroscope acts similar to a prism in that is separates the incident light into its constituent wavelengths.
For example, heated barium gas will produce an emission spectrum which are the individual energies of photons represented by lines on a scale that is measured in frequency of light, which represents all the different possible energy transitions from one shell to another. 

It takes less energy to move an electron from one shell to another the further away it is from the nucleus as the nucleus positively charged and so attracts the negatively charged electrons.