An operating system provides an interface between the user and the hardware.
Users typically interact with applications/software, the operating system provides a platform for that software to run.
Some operating systems have built-in programs for things such as file management, general computer maintenance and device drivers.

The operating system is also responsible for handling interrupts, which is when any device requires the attention of the processor.

Modern operating systems are also responsible for resource management which allows for multitasking.
Multitasking is where you have more than one program open at the same time and the processor allocates time to each process and cycles between them. This happens so quickly that it provides the illusion that multiple programs are executing simultaneously.

**File management**
- Data is stored in files
- A files extension tells the operating system what type of file it is and what program is needed to open it
- The operating system may present a logical structure of files and folders and allow users to rename, delete, copy and move files but in reality the data is typically fragmented over the disk.

**User Management**
- Allows multiple users to log into the same computer
- The OS will retain settings for each user
- Each user may have different access rights to files and programs
- A client-server network may impose a fixed or roaming profile for a user and manage login requests to a network

**User Interfaces**
- WIMP: Windows, Icons, Menus and Pointers
- Visual
- Interactive
- Intuitive
- Optimised for mouse and touch gesture input