While the processor fetches, decodes and executes instructions, other devices and applications may require the processors attention. They need a way to signal to the processor that they require attention, that is what we call an interrupt.

With this, the FDE cycle can be evolved as:
- Fetch
- Decode
- Execute
- Check for new interrupts

During an interrupt, the processor will need to stop executing its current program in order to run code for the interrupt, known as the interrupt service routine. 

The interrupt service routine is a program with a set of instructions that need to be fetched, decoded and executed to carry out the operations of the interrupt.
This means that the contents of the program counter need to be changed to point to the address for the first instruction of the interrupt.

When an interrupt is received, the values held in the registers are copied into a data structure in memory know as the stack.
These values are pushed onto the stack in a stack frame, saving them for later retrieval.
After this, the interrupt can be executed.
Once the interrupt is complete we pop the frame off the top of the stack, allowing us to retrieve the values, load them back into the registers and carry on executing the original program.

You can also interrupt an interrupt, it follows the same process as a normal interrupt except there is now two sets of values in the stack in memory, which we can go back and execute afterwards.

Interrupt service routines are important and always have a higher priority than normal programs.