**Multi-tasking operating system**
We typically want more than one program open at once.
In single-processor systems, each active program is scheduled to receive a tiny time slice in quick rotation, giving the impression they are operating at the same time.

**Multi-user operating system**
Most operating systems allow for more than one person to use the computer at the same time.
The computer will manage the users permissions and access rights when they log on.
Server operating system software will handle the requests of multiple people using different computers on a network at the same time

**Distributed operating system**
You can combine the processing power of multiple computers across a network for a single task. In distributed computing, the operating system controls and coordinates the computers, presenting them to the user as if they were a single system.
Online shopping sites often use this form of operating system, e.g. your basket may be handled by one server while the querying of items is handled by another.

**Embedded operating system**
Embedded operating systems tend to be designed to run on dedicated hardware so they run with maximum efficiency, using low-powered processors and very little memory.

**Real-time operating system**
In safety-critical environments such as aircraft autopilot systems and self driving car systems, processes have to be guaranteed to execute within a known time frame. Plenty of redundancy is built into these systems so they can handle sudden increases in input. As such, processors in real-time operating systems rarely run at capacity.
