
# What is a programming paradigm?
A paradigm is a way of doing things.

Software is written using programming languages, as programmers we have to expect programming languages to include facilities like variables, loops, conditions and arrays.

The syntax or commands are different, but the underlying concepts haven't changed much. For example, Python, Visual Basic and C# come from the same family and are the same paradigm.

# Why do we need different programming paradigms?
Most programming languages in most programming paradigms are said to be Turing complete

Turing complete languages can solve all the problems that a computer is able to solve.

The simple answer as to why multiple paradigms exist is that some problems are better suited to being solved using a certain paradigm.

# Low-level vs high-level languages

## Low-level languages
### Machine code
- Least abstract
- Closest to what actually happens on the computer
- Programs directly in 1s and 0s.
- These translate into matching electrical signals - e.g., 1 for high voltage and 0 for low
### Assembly language
- Uses short code words known as mnemonics
- Each mnemonic matches a specific sequence of 1s and 0s
- One to one relationship
- Written in assembly language and translated by a specific assembler

## High-level languages
The first languages that could go further than machine code and assembly language were developed in the early 1950s, starting with Fortran.
These languages had a one to many relationship, as each instruction could give rise to many lines of machine code
Because they were so much more complex, they were called high-level languages.

High-level languages broadly fit into two further categories:
- Imperative
- Declarative

Imperative languages use statements that change a program's state in the form of sequence, selection, iteration, etc. They consist of commands for a computer to perform and focus on describing how a program operates.

Declarative languages focus on what the program should accomplish. i.e., Tell the computer what to do, not how to do it.

There are two main paradigms that fall under the heading of imperative languages:
- Procedural programming
- Object-oriented programming
Procedural programming is a type of imperative programming paradigm where a program is built from one or more subroutines (procedures, functions etc).

Object-oriented programming paradigms are a modern extension of the imperative programming approach that focuses more on a modular approach to programming.



# Advantages and disadvantages of machine code and assembly languages
| Advantages | Disadvantages |
| ---- | ---- |
| Assembly language has the same efficiency of execution as machine code due to its one to one nature | It is machine-dependant and code is very hard - if not impossible - to port |
| It can produce very precise, locally optimised and efficient code | Programmers who can write efficient assembly code are rare - which is one of the reasons why HLLs were produced in the first place |
| It provides direct access to system-level features without having to go through a software interface - again, this improves the speed of the program | Even in the hands of a talented programmer, code can be tedious to write and very prone to bugs |
| In essence, you are in complete control of your code. | The code can be difficult to understand - therefore, it can also be hard to modify and maintain. |

# Feature comparison of procedural vs object-oriented paradigms
|  | Procedural | Object oriented |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Features | Sequence, selection and iteration | Sequence, selection and iteration plus inheritance, objects, classes and encapsulation |
| Data | Stored in local or global variables and accessible to other parts of the program using parameter passing | Stored in attributes and concealed from other parts of the program via encapsulation |
| Program structure | Procedures and functions | Classes, methods and instances |
| Program logic | Expressed in a series of procedure calls | Based on models and behaviours |
