# Assembly language
The very first languages such as ENIAC (1946) were direct machine code languages that required programmers to enter binary combinations of 1s and 0s.
These languages were incredibly difficult to program with, leading to the creation of assembly languages.
Assembly languages substituted binary code with simple sequences of letters known as mnemonics.
All assembly languages are classified as low level.
Assembly language is directly translated into binary machine code by an assembler.

# LMC Language
LMC is a conceptual computer often used in education theory and exams to help students learn, test and understand assembly language.
The instruction set contains 11 simple instructions (mnemonics) - a real instruction set in assembly code would contain many more.

| Mnemonic | Instruction |
| ---- | ---- |
| ADD | Add |
| SUB | Subtract |
| STA | Store |
| LDA | Load |
| BRA | Branch always |
| BRZ | Branch if zero |
| BRP | Branch if possible |
| INP | Input |
| OUT | Output |
| HLT | End program |
| DAT | Data location |
In RAM we have:
- 100 memory locations (numbered 0 to 99)
Inside the CPU:
- An arithmetic logic unit.
- An accumulator to restore the results of the last operation or calculation.
- A program counter to store the address of the next instruction in memory.
- An instruction register to hold the first digit of the instruction read from memory.
- An address register to hold the second and third digits of the instruction read from memory - this is our operand.

We also have:
- An input tray where a number can be typed when needed.
- An output area where any numbers output are printed.

The program counter only holds two digits (0 to 99), while the accumulator holds three digits and a sign. (-999 to 999).

When an instruction is read from memory the first digit is used to decide what to do.
As with real assembly languages, to help us write programs more easily, each instruction type is given its own mnemonic which the LMC assembler converts into the corresponding machine code.

Note that the LMC computer cannot tell whether memory locations contain instructions or data.
Most modern computers can segment their memory, but there must be a way for the output from one program to become the instructions of another.

The assembler also allows us to name addresses - these names are called labels.
Any word that is not a recognised instruction is assumed to be a label.
If the label is before the instruction (or DAT), the LMC defines the label as representing that address.
If the label is after the instruction (or DAT), the address us substituted for the label.

The two boxes to the left of the LMC are:
- The input to the assemble function
- The intermediate output with labels converted to the correct numbers.

Each line of LMC code can have up to three parts
- Label
- Mnemonic
- Data it applies to

Example Code:

| Code | Mnemonic | Description |
| ---- | -------- | ----------- |
| 0    | HLT      | Stop (Little Man has a rest)            |
| 1    | ADD         | Add the contents of the memory address to the accumulator            |
| 3    | STA/STO         | Store the value currently stored in the accumulator in the memory address            |
| 9    | INP/OUT         | Take from the input if the address is 1; copy to the output if the address is 2            |
