# Optical Storage
Optical storage works using lasers.
On non re-writable discs (e.g. a CD-R), data is physically burned into the disc in the form of "pits" and "lands", lands are areas untouched by the burning laser. A laser can then read the data as the pits cause the laser light to scatter and reflect less, it's the changes in reflectivity that the CD drive interprets as 0s and 1s.
However, on re-writable disks (e.g. CD-RW) the chemical composition of the disc is changed by a reversible chemical reaction.

**Positives**
- Cheap
- Lightweight
- Portable
**Negatives**
- Slow transfer speeds
- Prone to scratches

## Magnetic Storage
Magnets have polarity (North and South),  which engineers realised is handy for storing zeroes and ones.
In a hard drive (HDD) there a spinning disc, called a platter, which is made out of a magnetic material and is divided into billions of tiny slits, each with their own independent, changeable and persistent magnetism. A Drive head moves over this disc while it is spinning and is what reads and writes the data.
This drive head is a mechanical part, and so is liable to fail eventually.

**Positives**
- Cheap
- Large capacity
**Negatives**
- Slow transfer speeds
- Fragile due to mechanical parts

# Solid State/Flash Storage
Solid state drives (e.g. an SSD, an SD card.) work by electrical current forcing electrons into floating gates between two oxide layers. This causes a difference in charge in the floating gate and is interpreted as a zero or a one.
Over time, the floating gate will deteriorate meaning that the transfer of electrons will become unreliable. This means that solid state media has a limited number of read/write cycles and therefore a limited lifespan.

**Positives**
- Highly durable
- Fast transfer speeds
**Negatives**
- Cost
- Limited read/write cycles

