# Hooke's Law
$F=k\Delta L$, k as stiffness aka spring constant.
### Units
F, force (load) N
k spring constant (stiffness) $N m^{-1}$
$\Delta L$ extension from natural length m

# Tensile stress and strain
Stress and strain are used to make comparisons between different materials. They look at original cross-sectional area as well as original length

## Tensile Stress 
Tensile stress = load/original cross-sectional area
$\sigma = \frac{F}{A}$
Rearranging gives:
$A=\frac{F}{\sigma}$
### Units
$\sigma$, Tensile Stress, $N m^{-2}$ or Pa
F, force N
A cross-sectional area $m^{-2}$

## Tensile Strain
Strain = extension / original length
$\epsilon=\frac{\Delta L}{L}$ 
Rearranging gives:
$L=\frac{\Delta L}{\epsilon}$
$\Delta L = \frac{L}{\epsilon}$
### Units
Tensile strain, $\epsilon$ (epsilon) is a ratio, therefore there are no units

# Elastic strain energy, breaking stress
## Elastic strain energy
energy stored  = $\frac{1}{2}F\Delta L$
Rearranging gives:
$\Delta L=2\times \frac{energy\space stored}{F}$
$F=2\times \frac{energy \space stored}{\Delta L}$
- When you stretch a spring, work is done.
- The energy stored in the stretched spring is the work done on the spring in stretching it.
- Energy stored = $\frac{1}{2}F\Delta L$ = area under force-extension graph.
- $\frac{1}{2}F\Delta L$ only applies if the load does not exceed the elastic limit of the spring.
### Extra notes
If a spring has mass, m hung from it, remember the force, F, is given by $F=m\times g$. Where g is the acceleration due to gravity; on Earth this is taken as $9.81 Nkg^{-1}$.
The energy stored in the spring is elastic potential energy. If the load is taken off the spring, the energy stored is converted to kinetic energy of the spring.

## Breaking stress
For a material, there is a maximum stress (force per unit area). This is called The ultimate tensile strength (UTS)/Tensile strength/Breaking stress (not breaking point) OR Strength.

Once the point of UTS has been reached, the force needed to cause further increase in the length of wire decreases. If you leave the load on the wire untouched, the wire will carry on increasing in length until it breaks.

### Yield point
For some types of steel, there is a clear yield point. The 'lump' after the end of the part of the graph that follows Hooke's Law.

# Description of plastic behaviour, fracture and brittle behaviour linked to force-extension graphs.
Plastic behaviour - After the elastic limit is passed (beyond the limit of proportionality) even if you take off the load, the wire will be permanently stretched. This is plastic behaviour.

Stiffness - Shown by gradient. The gradient is also the Young modulus. For example, steel is stiffer than glass.

Strength - Point on graph at UTS (tensile stress, breaking stress)

Ductile - A material that is ductile stretches easily, even beyond the elastic limit. Copper is ductile. It is used to make wires because of this.

Brittle - Glass is brittle, it snaps/fractures with very little yield, so its shape does not change before it breaks (or only very little).

Polymeric - (Such as polythene) shows a high strain at low stress.

# Quantitative and qualitative application of energy conservation to examples involving elastic strain energy and energy to deform.
Quantitative - you need numbers for this.
Qualitative - you need words for this.

If a spring is stretched by a load, but the load does not exceed the elastic limit, then the spring stores energy. The energy is stored as elastic potential energy.

If the load is taken off quickly, the elastic potential energy is converted to kinetic energy.

Since Hooke's Law says that $F=k\Delta L$
Swap the F from in the equation that gives work done to stretch a spring (work done = $\frac{1}{2}F\Delta L$)
This gives:
$E_p=k\Delta L^2$
## Loading a wire beyond its elastic limit
In a graph where a steel wire has been stretched past its elastic limit, the area under the 'loading' line is the wore done in stretching the wire. But it is not so straightforward to calculate as the area is not a triangle, you need to count squares.
The area under the loading line also gives the energy stored in the wire.
The unloading line is parallel to the loading line.
When the load is taken off the wire completely, the spring will be slightly longer than it was originally.

## Loading and unloading a rubber band
Rubber bands change length more easily during unloading than in loading
The rubber band will return to the same original length from before it was stretched.
The work done in stretching the rubber band is the areas under the loading curve.
The work done by the rubber band when it is unloaded is the area under the unloading curve.
There is a difference between the work done in loading and the work done in unloading (The area between the two curves). This is the internal energy retained by the elastic band.