When developing a solution to a problem for a computer system, programmers work through a number of distinct phases.
Collectively, these phases are known as the software development life cycle (SDLC).
The arrangement of these phases and how programmers move from one to another, both back and forwards, is known as the software development methodology.

Software Development Life Cycle:
- Feasability : Is the problem solvable?
- Requirements : Working out what the solution needs to do.
- Analysis and design : Working out how the solution needs to do it.
- Implementation : Coding the solution.
- Testing : Checking it actually works.
- Deployment : Installing it in the target environment.
- Evaluation : Checking in with the user - is the solution complete?
- Maintenance : Ensuring it continues to function properly by the way of improvements, patches and updates.

There are also multiple software development methodologies (Waterfall, Rapid application development, Spiral, Agile, Extreme programming.)

Waterfall:
- The waterfall model derives its name from its cascading effect from one phase to another.
- Each phase has a well-defines start and end point with identifiable deliverables.
- A slight evolution of the waterfall model allows you to move back to a previous stage as well as forwards - this reflects the fact that developers often have to rework earlier stages in light of knowledge gained as development progresses.

Rapid application development:
- Rapid application development (RAD) is a methodology that involves producing successive prototypes of the software until a final version is produced and approved.
- Following the initial approval of a feasible program, increasingly refined prototype are made with reduced functionality.
- These are designed, coded, tested and evaluated with the end user.
- You might decide they are happy with the system or that they want further improvements, which will start a new cycle (iteration)

Spiral model:
- The spiral model is a risk-driven development methodology. Any project has its own set of unique risks associated with it
- The spiral model is more of a guide for development teams, allowing them to adopt elements of one or more methodologies like waterfall or RAD.
- It is a common misconception that the spiral model is a fixed process that must be followed in the correct order. In reality is is wholly dependant on the project and its unique risks.
- This model is better thought of as a process model generator, where decisions on he software development methodology are made based on the risks identified.

Agile methodology:
- Agile development refers to a group of methodologies (not a single one) that came about in the early 2000s
- These methodologies focus on the idea that requirements will shift and change during development - this can only be dealt with by producing software in an iterative way.
- They are a more refined form of the older concepts behind rapid application development (RAD).
- The product is built in a series of iterations known as sprints.
- These are short, time-boxed periods when a team has focused goals to complete a set amount of work.
- Each sprint should ideally be a bite-sized piece of focused work, taking no longer than one to four weeks.

Extreme programming:
- Extreme programming is not so much a software methodology as it is a framework
- It aims to produce very high-quality code and promote developers' quality of life by encouraging them to adopt a set of common practises that focus on the values of:
	- Simplicity
	- Communication
	- Feedback
	- Courage
	- Respect
- It is considered an agile framework in that it encourages regular, small, iterative software releases.
- At its core are the concepts of collective ownership and every team member being of equal value.