# Testing
- Any non trivial program needs to be tested to make sure it works as intended.
- To fully test a solution, developers need to adopt a number of different testing strategies.
- The most common strategies are:
	- Black-box testing
	- White-box testing
	- Alpha testing
	- Beta testing

## Black-box testing
- Not concerned with how the program works, black-box testing simply checks whether an input produces the expected output
- For example, if we had a piece of software that we expect to return 10 when we input 5, as long as that is the case, the test passes
- Any other outputs result in a fail
- With black-box testing, code efficiency is not important as long as inputs return the desired outputs.
- Ideally, black box testing involved checking every possible input to a program. If all inputs produce the desired outputs, we can be satisfied the program works in all cases - however this is often not feasible.
- In reality, we just choose appropriate test data to cover a range of situations.

## White-box testing
- White-box testing involved testing the algorithms in the code and making sure all parts of those algorithms function as intended
- It focuses on identifying and testing all the possible paths of execution through a program
- On each test run, the path of execution is noted so it can be compared with other runs
- Unlike black-box testing, white-box testing is also checking the overall efficiency of code

## Alpha and Beta testing
- Alpha and Beta testing are carried out wen software is nearly ready for release and can be tested as a complete solution.
- Alpha and Beta testing apply especially to commercial software such as computer games.
- When the product is almost ready for release, companies often want a wider community audience to test the product out
- The only difference between the two is when they take place and who performs the testing.
- Alpha testing typically occurs first and is limited to internal employees and their friends and families.
- It is often a very early version of the finished software, quite rough around the edges and may contain a number of bugs.
- Beta testing is usually opened up to a much wider community through a public beta program.
- The program is in an almost finished state. The developers are looking to test areas like load balancing and multiple hardware compatibility. 
