Encryption is the process of encoding data so that it can be read only by the sender and intended recipient.

Encryption has been around for as long as we have been producing written communications.

One of the first forms of encryption was the Caesar cipher.
To decrypt a Caesar cipher encoded message, the recipient needs to know how many places the alphabet has been shifted by - this is known as the key.
If the recipient has the key then they can decrypt the message, although Caesar ciphers are quite easy to crack without the key.

# Symmetric encryption
With symmetric encryption, a single key is used to both encrypt and decrypt a message, when using this method both parties need to know the key and keep it secret.
The same key can be used multiple times, although a unique key can be generated each time in an attempt to make it harder to crack (like what the nazis did with the enigma machine).

However, symmetric encryption carries risks as the message can be cracked by:
- Interception of the key
- Duplication of the key production algorithm
Because of this, systems that send or receive sensitive information (like customer financial details) use a far more secure encryption method known as asymmetric encryption.

# Asymmetric encryption
With asymmetric encryption, the process involves two different keys.
The plaintext message is encrypted using the first key (usually a public key).
Once the message is sent, the recipient can then decrypt it using the second key (usually a private key that only the recipient knows/has).

The key used by the sender to encrypt the message isn't the same as the key that the recipient uses to decrypt the message, hence it is virtually impossible to crack this encryption method as you cannot derive one key from another, making asymmetric encryption far more secure.

The keys are generated in a way such that anything encrypted with the public key can be decrypted with the private key.
These two keys are known as a 'key pair'.

To ensure the validity of public keys, they are usually stored in secure servers known as 'keyservers' or 'key safes'.

