# What is a database?
A database is nothing more than an organised collection of data.
Organising data into a database allows for easy :
- Addition
- Modification
- Deletion
- Searching
Before the mass adoption of computing technology, we used to use paper based filing systems and databases.

With the use of technology becoming more common, databases began to move from paper to computer.
Electronic databases offer several useful benefits :
- Easier to retrieve, add, delete, update and modify data
- Easier to back up and make copies of data
- Can be accessed by multiple people at the same time and from different locations

# Flat File Databases
Typically, a database will store data in a table (also known as an entity or file). These tables contain records (known as rows or tuples) and also fields (known as columns or attributes).
This is an example of a flat file database. It only contains one table and can be created very easily using either database or spreadsheet software and is often saved as a 'comma-separated values' file (CSV).

Flat file databases are very simple but they are quick to set up, require little expertise to maintain and are suitable for storing small amounts of data. Typical uses include:
- Storing contact details
- Small product databases
- Maintaining a game or music collection

Beyond trivial applications though, a flat file database can become very inefficient and can begin to contain a lot of repetitive data. All this data needs to be stored and so repetition takes up more space in the database and as the database grows, the situation gets worse.

If we only used flat file databases, they would quickly : 
- Take up unnecessary space
- Be slow to query
- Become difficult to maintain

Luckily, though, there is a cure.

# Relational databases
It is better to split up larger or more complex databases into multiple tables. By creating a separate table we can remove a great deal of repeating data.

Of course, we now need a way to link the tables together. This link between tables is known as a relationship.
If we have many items which correspond to a few bigger groups, we can see that :
- One group can contain many items
- and many items can belong to just one group

This is known as a one-to-many relationship.

You will need a common field in both tables for the relationship to work.

# Primary and foreign keys
In a database, we should also make sure each record within a table is uniquely identifiable.
Consequently, there must be at least one field in each record that is guaranteed to be unique - this field is known as the primary key.

If a table has a relational link to another table, we also have what are known as foreign keys.

# Types of relationship and entity-relationship diagrams (ERD)
When designing a relational database and linking tables, relationships come in three forms:
- 1:1 (one to one), for example, one student has one planner.
- 1:M (one to many), for example, one tutor group contains many students.
- M:M (many to many), for example, one student can be taught by many teachers. (Makes logical sense but is not considered to be good database design.)

We can sketch out the relationship between database tables using an entity-relationship diagram (ERD).
When we do this, tables are represented by boxes with the name of the table inside. 

# Using indexing and secondary keys with database tables
A database is only useful if we can query it to quickly retrieve information.
The database automatically maintains an index of primary keys so that a specific primary key can be located quickly and easily.
The index provides the position of each record according to its primary key - this makes retrieval of records referenced by the index much quicker as items do not need to be searched as quickly.

You can also specify one or more secondary key fields to be indexed. You would do this for fields that are often used as search criteria.