When working with databases we need to think about data and how we handle it in four distinct ways :
- Capturing : How do we get the data into the database in the first place?
- Selecting : How do we then query the data and retrieve it?
- Managing : How do we manage, manipulate, add, edit and delete the data?
- Exchanging : How do we exchange the data with other people/systems?

# Capturing data
## Paper based forms
A vast amount of data is still capture using paper-based data capture forms.
Data input via this method is largely manual. It involves a human reading the form and typing the information into a computer-based system.
For the process to be as fast as possible and to avoid errors, as number of tactics can be implemented when designing the data capture form : 
- Every part of the form clearly labelled
- Instruction to complete the form in black pen
- Instruction to complete the form in capital letters
- Use of tick boxes
- Squares for entering each letter separately
These all help reduce the likelihood that the person inputting the data will make a mistake due to poor legibility of the text.

## Optical Character Recognition
To help speed up and automate data input, you could use optical character recognition (OCR).
This technology automatically reads text by interpreting the shape of the letters. It works far better with printed text than handwriting.
The Post Office uses OCR software to read postcodes and route mail.
Road cameras use automatic number plate recognition software to handle congestion charging and identify drivers who are speeding.

## Optical Mark Recognition
Another option is optical mark recognition (OMR). This technology is often used for multiple-choice tests and lottery tickets.
It's a very fast and efficient way of collecting data and inputting it in a database while significantly reducing the possibility of human error.

# Selecting data
## Structured Query Language
Once we have captured information in a database, we need an efficient way to retrieve it.
A common query language for all databases is the Structured Query Language (SQL).
Developed in the 1970s, SQL allow for the fast and efficient retrieval, deletion and manipulation of data using a simple set of commands :
- SELECT
- FROM
- WHERE

## Query by Example
Developed in parallel with SQL was another database query language called Query by Example (QBE).
QBE was the first graphical query language, making use of visual tables where the user would enter commands and the conditions.
Many of the graphical front-ends of databases such as Microsoft Access implement ideas from QBE.
Once a query is built using QBE, it is converted into statements that can be executed against the database.
By utilising QBE, the user doesn't need to remember the finer details of SQL syntax.
Both SQL and QBE allow you to :
- Specify tables
- Specify fields
- Specify criteria
- Specify output sorting
- Use boolean expressions (e.g. AND, OR, NOT)

# Managing data
We also need to be able to modify a database once it has been initially set up - this could involve providing easy ways to :
- Add new data
- Edit/modify existing data
- Delete data
You can achieve this via a database manipulation language (DML) like SQL, using commands such as:
- UPDATE
- DELETE
- INSERT
Alternatively, you could use other built-in facilities of a database management system (DBMS).

## Database management systems
Database management systems (DBMS) provide a layer of abstraction for the user and programmer.
A DBMS hides the underlying structure of the data and ensures it remains integral by :
- Preventing the creation of duplicate primary keys
- Enforcing validation rules
- Providing secure access
- Providing encryption
- Providing program data independence
- Managing multiple users

# Exchanging data
Finally, we need to make sure we can exchange data between different databases and other systems or applications such as :
- Spreadsheet software
- Accounting programs
To do this we need to consider :
- The common formats used for exchanging data
- Manual methods of data exchange
- Automatic methods of data exchange

## Common formats
XML and JSON (which has largely replaced XML) are both human-readable open formats for structuring data.
They are both common standards designed for storing and transporting data.
As long as one system exports data (in JSON for example) another system can accept the same data and be sure of the format it will arrive in. 

A comma-separated values file (CSV) is another popular format for exchanging data.
Each record is stored on a separate line in the file, and each field is separated by a comma.
As the structure is fixed and know, important routines can be written to extract the data from a CSV file.
Many systems also allow data to be output in CSV format.

## Manual methods
Once the format for data exchange has been agreed, we still need to exchange the data.
We also need to consider how the data will make its way from one system to another.
Manual methods could include : 
- Memory stick
- Optical media
- Removable hard disk
- Email
- Paper-based

## Automatic methods
A better method would be to bypass manual data exchange altogether and have the two databases interface with one another so they can read and write directly to and from each other's tables.
One such live connection method is known as Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), a protocol between two systems to facilitate the exchange of data.
Popular uses include and automatic order placement system for when a shop's stocks are running low.

Exam boards often exchange results data with schools automatically before the data is forwarded on to UCAS and universities.
On results day, a school can log on and see its exam results already present in the system.
EDI significantly increases the speed of data transmission and the efficiency of processes for users.
This process can be entirely automated without any human involvement.
Of course, this also means that any error in the data will be replicated across multiple systems. 
