Utility software is designed to keep your computer safe, keep it running, or provide you with useful tools for tasks such as file management.

**Utility software: File repair**
- Files can become corrupt or damaged for a number of reasons.
- File repair software attempts to correct these issues and restore the file to its original working state
- A file repair facility is often built into certain applications, as well as being a separate dedicated tool found in most operating systems

**Utility software: Backup**
- With so much data now stored digitally, back-ups are essential.
- Backups can be set up to be manual, automatic or scheduled.
- You can perform full backups or incremental backups.
- You can back up to different media or an off-site cloud system.
- Backup software can come with your operating system but can also be purchased/downloaded separately

**Utility software: Data compression**
- Compression reduces the size of a file so it takes up less space, meaning it can be sent faster over the internet.
- Compressed files must be extracted before they can be read.
- Depending on the compression algorithm, data is either lost OR data is represented in a different, more compact form.

**Utility software: Defragmentation**
- Defragmentation reorganises files on a hard disk, putting fragments of files and free space back together.
- This process reduces the movement of the read/write head across the surface of the disk, speeding up file access
- SSDs do not need defragmenting as they have no moving parts, doing so will only reduce the SSDs lifespan.

**Utility software: Anti-malware**
- Anti-malware software helps keep your computer and files safe from malware (obviously).
- Windows comes with anti-malware protection built-in, configured and active.
- As with many other utility programs, there are companies who specialise in dedicated anti-malware software.