Programmers aim to write easily readable and modifiable source code.
A processor cannot run source code - it needs to be translated into machine code.
During the compilation process, a compiler runs through a series of parses.
With each parse, the compiler performs different actions on the source code.
Each parse is designed to carry out set tasks and prepare the code for the next stage of compilation.

**Stage 1: Lexical analysis**
- The lexer stars by converting lexemes in the source code into a series of tokens.
- As the lexer reads the source code, it scans the code letter by letter.
- When it encounters a white space, operator symbol or special symbol, it decides that a word (lexeme) is complete.
- It then checks if the lexeme is valid using a predefined set of rules that allow every lexeme to be identified as a valid token.
- Keywords, constants, identifiers, strings, numbers, operators and punctuation symbols are all considered tokens.
- Once we have created the token stream from the lexemmes in the source code, it is time to input those tokens into a symbol table
- Multiple symbol tables can be created for each subroutine, allowing for variables to have the same name in a program but in a different scope
- The symbol table may be pre-populated with keywords from the programming language
- A symbol table is usually stored as a hash table for efficient lookup in the syntax analysis stage
- A strings table could be created in addition to the symbol table, this helps to make the subsequent changes of compilation more efficient

**Stage 2: Syntax analysis**
- Syntax analysers analyse the syntactical structure of the input, checking if it is in the correct syntax of the programming language.
- It does this by analysing the token stream against production rules to detect any errors in the code.
- Doing this accomplishes two tasks
	- Checking for errors and reporting them
	- Building an abstract syntax tree (parse tree)
- We already have our token stream created from lexemes in the original source code.
- The lexer couldn't tell us if these tokens were valid within the syntax of the language, but the syntax analyser can.
- A line of code passes the syntax check when it strictly follows the rules of the language
- If the check fails, the syntax analyser can report the failure to the user. Letting them know the exact line and location of the error and even suggesting possible corrections.
- Aside from producing errors if the program fails, the main output of this phase is to create an abstract syntax tree (parse tree)
