**Libraries:**
- Ready compiled and tested programs that can be run when needed.
- They are typically grouped together into software libraries.
- Most programming languages have extensive libraries of pre-made functions (called a standard library)
- The math library in python provides many functions for mathematical operations for you to use in your code.
- Someone programming in Windows can call upon Dynamic Link Libraries (DLLs)
	- These libraries contain sub routines written to carry out a common task on the windows operating system.
	- All the programmer needs to do is call the appropriate DLL subroutine with the correct parameters.

**Benefits and drawbacks of using library routines:**

| Benefits                                                                 | Drawbacks                                                                                                 |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Quick and easy to use and hook into your own code                        | Adding functionality or making specific tweaks can be difficult/impossible.                               |
| Pre-tested, so you can be relatively sure that they are free from errors | Sometimes you are completely abstracted ("black boxed") from the actual implementation of the subroutines |
| Pre-compiled, so they are typically optimised to run quickly             | You have to trust that the developers will continue to maintain the library                               | 

**Linkers and Loaders:**
- The linker is responsible for putting the appropriate machine addresses in all the external call and return instructions so all modules and external library routines are linked together correctly. It also links any separately compiled subroutines into the object code.
- The linker can use two methods to pull in the libraries it needs:
	- Static linking:
		- All the required code from the libraries is included directly in the finished machine code - this can result in larger executables.
	- Dynamic linking:
		- Compiled versions of the required libraries are stored on the host computer.
		- The operating system links the required code from the library as the program is running.
		- While this cuts down on executable size, if the dynamic libraries change then the program may stop because it tries to call a subroutine in the wrong way.
- The loader is the part of the operating system that loads the executable program file (machine code) into memory, ready to be run.
- When using dynamic linking, it will also be responsible for loading the required libraries into memory.